---
date: 20/01/2019
summary: Not satisfied with the quality of code in my Swift app, I decided to rewrite the entire project from the ground up, making use of Git and its powerful version control features.
type: project
tags: psakse;swift;programming
---

# Update – Psakse (iOS) source code released on GitHub

The tile puzzle game I created at the tail-end of last year was an important project for me. It was the first time I used Swift outside of learning it in a course, the first time a non-web project had a user interface, and the first game I’d ever implemented that I had created. In the four months it took me to get the app in a somewhat working state I learned a lot of new things about Swift and programming, but I couldn’t really use this new knowledge to benefit the app since it was almost finished. Additionally, some of the early decisions I made meant it was difficult to replace sections of code without breaking something else that relied on it. To solve these issues, I decided to do a full rewrite.

Armed with a copy of the old source and a new blank project, I looked through the old to see what was salvageable and attempted to build improved replacements for anything still needed but that wasn’t up to standard. First on the chopping block was the 2-dimensional array used to store the grid buttons and cards. Honestly, what was I thinking! That was ripped out and replaced with a single array that now held Card objects as opposed to Tile objects which held Card objects. Tile objects were useless from the start, so those went in the bin too. As rewriting continued, the class representing the sub-grid with the deck and overflow cards was removed and added to the main grid to keep things concise.

With all the restructuring, some methods and functions needed varying levels of attention. Class methods fared mostly well, with problems mainly related to changed types, like the removal of the Tile class and the new structure of the Card class. Functions, however, were either a big mess or completely broken. Either way, they all went through major changes. In particular, the function that determined what to do when a grid button was pressed was almost unrecognisable by the end; now making proper use of optional values and new class structures, the new version came out to just about half the size of the old one. In fact, the only function that didn’t need a significant overhaul was the one that determined whether a given move was valid, since it was the last to be implemented, and was done so correctly.

Just as I was about to pat myself on the back for a job well redone, my housemate informed me about a great feature he learned about in his favourite language, Rust: sumtypes. These are essentially overpowered enumerations which can have their own methods with return values. He argued this could cut down the need for storing things like colour and symbol for a wildcard, or that a normal card is not wild, just by knowing the type of card. The source code in the GameViewController explains this better since you can see how the whole structure works. Regardless, I decided to redo the Card system again – this was now the fourth iteration – and get the system back to a playable state.

Everything was finished by about 11:30PM on Wednesday; the game was now functional, and the code clean and organised. I picked up my phone to play an actual non-test game, but a thought stopped me: Why don’t I add a challenge mode? This new I’d just dreamed of would give the player a single puzzle that was always the same, and there would be many such that the challenge would be completing them all. I liked the idea of the change from completely random puzzles, but wanted to keep those in the app, so the question now was how to implement and give the user this choice.

This seemed like a job for a new view controller class. These classes contain the code for everything that occurs on different screens, or view, of the app. Each view can have its own controller with its own functions, classes, etc., and transition functions for telling the app which view to move to and what data to send with it on move. I quickly set up the HomeViewController with a simple three-button user interface, a logo I threw together, and wired up the button to the Random Puzzle mode. I also prototyped another view, the SelectViewController, with a table view for listing all the available puzzles to the user. On choosing from the list, the app would move back to the GameViewController but provide its own deck and grid layout instead of generating these randomly.

Despite some teething problems, like getting the deck and layout override working perfectly, the app performed well. Comparing the current code with the mess I had decided to replace earlier, I was certain building this new feature would have taken forever on the old system, and nothing would work well. The only issues remaining now were that I needed puzzles which were definitely solvable, and to put them in the game somewhere. The first part was mostly a cake walk; since I began building and refining the game – and also playing it in my spare time – I became intrigued with the possibility of finding an algorithm or strategy to solve puzzles easily. I reasoned I would need valid solutions to analyse, so I took a screenshot of every successfully completed board. Now I had a library of unique puzzles I could repurpose as challenges. The only thing was I’d have to sift through each image recording the deck and locations of fixed tiles. Fun.

The second problem was a little more interesting: “Where am I gonna put all these?" Storing every puzzle as an array in a JSON file seemed like the perfect solution. I still believe it is, but I haven’t managed to get it working just yet due to the Card objects being a sumtype. Because of this choice, Card must be JSON-decodable so the file can be read properly as a list of Cards, but I have not found a way to get this working. As of writing this post, I am still working on a solution, and – as a stop-gap measure – the two available puzzles are hardcoded into the table view inside the view controller. I would like to switch to JSON, but this seems to work for the moment while I investigate solutions.

Despite the JSON issue, I am quite pleased with the improved quality of the code, and I am glad I took the time to redo the project so that improvements further down the line are easier to implement. If you would like to peek at the code, or even build the project yourself in Xcode and load it onto your iOS device, everything you need can be found in [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/AnachronisticTech/Psakse). Please note, you are not allowed to redistribute this or package it for commercial purposes. If you have ideas or suggestions or bug reports, feel free to [contact me](https://anachronistic-tech.co.uk/contact.php) or post directly to the repository.