---
date: 10/02/2019
summary: I spent a few hours this weekend making some much-needed renovations to my blog. From adding Markdown support, to implementing a new, more convenient image uploader and picker system.
type: project
tags: web;programming
---

# What have I been updating this weekend? – This Blog (Web)

> "You've redecorated. I really like it!" - Thirteenth Doctor, Doctor Who

## Markdown support

The big change that will make things a lot easier going forward is the new Markdown integration. Until now, I've been writing posts in Microsoft Word, and using a neat RegEx I made to format images, links, and video. It worked for the STO Database project, but this blog has needed a beefier system from the beginning.

Enter Markdown. Most people will probably already know what Markdown is and how to use it, but for the few like me who have never heard of it before, think of it like Rich Text Formatting on the web *without* having to do all the HTML styling manually. Notice that italicised text in the last sentence? Not possible using the old post system. Now all I have to do is wrap the text in asterisks. What an age we live in!

There's the whole host of RTF features like bold text, italics, strikethroughs, and underlines, but there are also more complex structures. Anybody who's ever made a table in HTML manually will tell you it's not fun. Markdown has a great table feature that does most of the heavy lifting for you. There are also blocks for quotes and code snippets, unordered and ordered lists. Even link and image support.

The best part is that it's quite easy to convert to HTML too. Using the [Parsedown](https://parsedown.org/) library, all you have to do is create an instance of the Parsedown class and return it with the Markdown text you give it. In PHP, it's as simple as:

    include 'Parsedown.php';
    function toParsedown($text) {
        $Parsedown = new Parsedown();
        return $Parsedown->text($text);
    }

Now it is super-convenient to add this kind of content. Using the old system, adding anything other than images was a complete pain. Of course, I made a few modifications to the above function. I brought back my RegEx so I could add video support (because Markdown doesn't support video content), and also to deal with some layout issues I had previously solved with a CSS class. On the plus side, I learned I still know regular expressions!

## Better access to images

>"A picture is worth a thousand words"

This was a less visible change, but still a helpful one. The way I set up the site, there are some admin pages that I use to add and edit blog posts. Compared to the rest of the blog, these are probably the simplest pages in terms of logic and processing. Everything is done with text boxes, so there has been no way to quickly add an image to a post; to do that, I'd have to remember the filename and add it in manually.

I took a cue from the STO Database project and added an image slider to the page. Now, beneath the post text box is a horizontal slider filled with images that are stored in the images directory. Great, I could now see what images are available, but I could do better than that. Using a JavaScript function I found (which I sadly cannot remember where from), I added to each image and 'onclick' function that would insert at the current caret position in the text boxes the filename of the image. I extended it to work for thumbnails too, and I was good to go; no more blindly stabbing at what the filenames were. Just go to the right place in the text and click the image. Simples!

## Image uploader

>"Build it and they will come"

Show of hands: who likes FTPing into the server every time they want to upload an image for a blog post? No-one? I thought so. Well, as it happens, neither do I, but since I never implemented an image upload system, that's what I have to do whenever a post needs an picture. This is the main reason most of my posts tend not to have them. That's all about to change because now I have such a system! No more FTP unlocking and authentication to upload files using a program on my PC. Just a simple upload page with a quick authentication, and the image gets added to the list ready to be added to a post. Beautiful.

## Styling updates

With all the new Markdown stuff, some of the new advanced features didn't work flawlessly out of the box. Code and note blocks needed touching up, lists too. The hard part was accommodating for all the different visual combinations available on this blog, but I think I got everything. If anyone spots something amiss or thinks something should be styled differently, feel free to drop me an [email](mailto:danielmarriner@anachronistic-tech.co.uk).

## Wrap-up

These changes have been a long time coming. Adding a new, more convenient way to upload images has been on my list for months, but I just kept putting it off. With the system now in place, along with the new Markdown support, posts should start looking a bit more colourful and active. There are still things I want to update however. Next on the list is to overhaul the front page with AJAX calls to cut out some of the PHP there. Further down the line, I'd like to implement a newsletter system, and maybe RSS integration, though these are definitely longer term ideas. For this weekend, I think the above changes are just about enough!