---
date: 24/06/2019
summary: Finally being free from exams at university for another year, I decided to revisit my tile puzzle game for iOS and implement a much needed feature.
type: project
tags: swift;programming
---

# What have I been updating this week? - Psakse (iOS)

> "Good things come to those who wait."

Psakse (pronounced psa-x-eh) is a tile-based puzzle game I developed around eight months ago. Starting out as a scruffy looking board game with tiles made of post-it notes, it eventually blossomed into my first real iOS app written in Swift. You can find the post I wrote on it when it was finally in a decent state [here](https://anachronistic-tech.co.uk/article.php?id=10), and you can view the project on my GitHub profile [here](https://github.com/AnachronisticTech/Psakse). That post was written when the game itself was complete, but the app itself still needed a bit of refinement, so I set aside a day to implement the biggest item on my to-do list.

## The Problem

While the game is fun (at least for me) to play, there is a fundamental issue in that I cannot prove whether a generated puzzle is always solvable. As a good friend of mine showed last year, there exists at least one unsolvable puzzle. Though the likelihood of this puzzle being generated seems low, I find it difficult to believe it is the only unsolvable puzzle type. Since I've yet to develop an algorithm that generates only solvable puzzles or a proof that a generated puzzle is unsolvable, I decided an interesting stopgap measure would be to implement a challenge mode where the game would present the player with a puzzle that was definitely solvable because someone had already solved it.

In an attempt to find some kind of meaningful pattern or property of solvable grids, I began taking screenshots of every puzzle I managed to solve. Over the months I'd built up a library of solved grids for my analysis, but I figured they would double quite well for my challenge mode. My plan consisted of creating a JSON representation of all the tiles in the solved grid. With a list of such representations, the player would select one from a table view after which the app would load the deck and starting tiles from the JSON file and the game would continue as normal. There would be no need to store the solution since one must exist already, and the precise solution is irrelevant to the game anyway.

I threw together a quick menu interface to choose between random or challenge puzzles, and implemented a new view controller for the table view that would be used to select a puzzle. I hard-coded two puzzles directly into the view controller to make sure everything worked as intended, and proceeded to solve the puzzles. Since I already had a record of a solution for each, I sped through them and realised I should have some way of recording which puzzles have been solved by the player. Using Swift's and iOS's UserDefaults system, I added a small function which - on completion of the puzzle - would record the completion and append "Solved" to the puzzle in the list.

With the view controllers working, the only thing left was to create a decent, concise JSON representation of a puzzle, load it, and interpret as a puzzle successfully. This was where things fell over. Crafting a decent representation that struck a good balance between storing all the detail I wanted and being concise was a nightmare. What was worse was the fact that I could not get my head around Swift's JSON handling. It made no sense to me. Building the view controllers was done in about a day; the JSON took a week off-and-on of bashing my head against it before I decided to return my focus to university work. That's where I left the project at the end of January.

## The Push

> "Time and tide wait for no one"

Six months later and eight module exams done with, I figured I'd picked up a few tricks, and decided to return to Psakse and fix the JSON system once and for all. Having spent time away from the project, I came back to it with a fresh eye and some useful observations. For example, I didn't need to be storing the wildcards in the deck; all I need to know is how many there are and the game logic can do the rest. Also, I don't need some complicated system where we store the start tiles in a specific location in the JSON before they are added to the grid; I just need to know if a tile is locked and - if yes - its coordinate. By stripping out the unnecessary details, I could now build a more expressive yet concise way of representing a puzzle.

Then there was the matter of reading the file and interpreting a puzzle. Using what I'd learned from another project I had started involving iOS development (Spoilers!), I managed to load the contents of the file and parse each puzzle into an appropriately created struct which contained placeholders for all the details of each puzzle. The puzzle deck was parsed as an array of cards with their own struct and placeholder variables.

```swift
struct Puzzle: Codable {
  var id: Int      // Puzzle ID
  var wild: Int    // Number of wildcards
  var deck: [Card] // Deck of Card structs
}
```

```swift
struct Card: Codable {
  var sym: String // Card symbol
  var col: String // Card colour
  var locked: Int // Is card locked: -1 == no, >=0 == yes and grid position
}
```

Armed with a good representation of a puzzle and its necessary tiles, all that was left was to convert each tile in the struct to a Card object as defined in the GameViewController file that houses all the game logic. I'll admit, I wasn't too thrilled with what I came up with to solve this. I borrowed and retrofitted a 16-case switch block from a previous attempt at JSON interpretation in order to convert a JSON Card into a game Card. While it worked without issue, I'd still like to find a better way of doing it since I've basically implemented a Carroll-diagram with nested switches. I have a feeling I could do better using the Card constructor in GameViewController and its algebraic sum types, but I'll leave that for the next round of code clean-up which I suspect will be happening in the next month or two.

## Final Thoughts

Overall, I'm pleased to see the hard-coded puzzles finally removed from the view controller and replaced with an actual _working_ JSON version that I can add to whenever I like. The app code is now much cleaner and refactors puzzle data to a JSON file that can be updated independently of the app logic. The problem now - as, I guess, it was always going to be - is how to translate my library of solutions quickly into JSON. Incentive to get on and prove puzzle solvability algorithmically, or build a system which takes an image and outputs the JSON automatically. I know which sounds more fun to me!

