---
date: 24/06/2019
summary: With my university group software engineering project out of the way, I took the opportunity during a couple of weeks of downtime to improve my understanding of JavaScript based web server systems in my quest to finally ditch PHP once and for all.
type: project
tags: web;programming
---

# What have I been working on lately? - Node projects (Node.js)

> "Give a man a fish and he'll eat for a day."

A question that pretty much always comes up between people at the Department of Computer Science is "What got you into the field?". You hear a lot of common answers, "I started out with Scratch and Python at school", or "I taught myself some Java on the side". As an aside, I like that a lot of the time the answer is Minecraft and modding. For me, it was learning HTML at school in Year 9. We used the visual editor in Dreamweaver 8 (yes, not even Adobe Dreamweaver by that stage!) to build a couple of basic static sites for a few lessons. Things changed one day when I was clicking random buttons and found the 'split code view' where you could edit the code and the visuals at the same time! All of a sudden, I had all this control over what I was building which I _had_ to learn more about. By year 10 I'd gained a reputation as the local web-dev guy, and before long I scored my first paid commission.

> "Teach a man to fish and he'll eat for a lifetime."

In year 11 I joined the Student Magazine society as a contributing writer, part-time editor, and web administrator after I built a website to host all our content. This was my first experience using a hosting service, and we soon took advantage of the ability to implement dynamic features to the site. I built an admin section for submission and editing of articles protected by a login system built using the finest tools available to me at the time: PHP, my first programming language. That's right, what got me started on a path to a computer science degree at a great UK university was learning to code in what is widely regarded as one of the worst languages out there. Of course, I didn't know this at the time.

> "Give a man a fire and he'll be warm for a day."

Since starting university I've had the chance to pick up and explore a few different languages like Java, Python, Swift, C/C++, Alloy, etc. It has thus far been a fun ride, but I still find myself going back to web development. Imagine my delight when I discovered my course ha an optional first year module on web development technologies! Ok, everything we did was still PHP-based, but I learned how to build well-structured web apps, and - most importantly - introduced me to JavaScript and jQuery. 

> "Set a man on fire and he'll be warm for a lifetime."

I used what I'd learned to build this blog site and my Star Trek web app (apologies for not writing a follow-up blog on that; it has since been undergoing a major revamp and is still a work in progress). Things were going well until I realised just how unmaintainable the Star Trek app was. It got the stage where there was PHP everywhere. One PHP file in particular had over 2000 lines mostly to render the JavaScript that powered the front-end. The app worked, but there would be no possibility of adding new features since the front and back-ends were so tightly integrated and mangled together. I got so sick of it, I tore the whole thing down and began rebuilding it from the ground up. It's still a construction zone, but it's coming along nicely, and the influence of PHP is being minimised quite pleasingly (more on this in another post).

## New Horizons

The second year group software engineering project in my course introduced me to a whole new approach to web development: _not_ using PHP! We based our web application on the Python web framework Django, and I got to see first-hand how a modern web server serves dynamic content. While I didn't have much time to play around or experiment since we were on the clock, I decided to try out similar systems once the project was complete. To that end, I investigated Node.js and began to work on a few simple projects in my own time.

### 1) The MDN Library

The Mozilla Developer Network has a great tutorial on getting started with Node and building a basic dynamic web app with a Mongoose database. It's an excellent way to get started with Node.js, npm (the Node Package Manager), and NoSQL databases. There are code fragments to guide one through the setup and learning how all the pieces fit together to build a basic but functional web application with data input, storage, and retrieval.

### 2) The Video Library with Vue.js

Having built the MDN library, I thought about extending into an area which I've yet to find a decent solution for: video library management. In a nutshell, I was after something like iTunes does for music, but not necessarily for television programmes. I envisioned a client-server model where the user would have a Single Page Application (SPA) that would download and playback online videos with the ability to store data such as title, description, performers, genres, etc. The server was mostly the same as the MDN Library one, but the front-end was now built in Vue.js, a JavaScript framework aimed at automating the creation of SPAs without relying on the DOM-manipulation system popularised by frameworks like jQuery.

The system worked in a minimal state, but there were front and back-end issues I couldn't resolve at the time, so the project is currently on hold. I believe I could solve the problems given the time and inclination, but the motivation isn't really there at the moment. 

### 3) The Pool Tracker app

A popular passtime for my friends and I at university is blackball pool. None of us have anything in the way of official training or experience, but we've read through the rules a couple of times and played a good hundred games or so. I thought tracking who is currently the top player of the group sounded like a good idea, so I started recording the matches in a note on my phone. It wasn't long before we had to migrate to an Excel spreadsheet to keep track and, though Excel is pretty beefy and can hold all the data, I'm not so satisfied. I resolved to build a mobile app to track everything.

Like the Video Library, I decided on a client-server model in case I ever wanted to track data from different devices, and set to work building the server and designing a suitable database schema. I had already designed a schema for when I had planned to build the server in PHP, but I scrapped it and started fresh, taking advantage of Mongo and NoSQL features such as storing non-atomic data and lists. I set up a basic server which had routes for both rendered web pages in a browser and raw JSON for external services such as the iOS app I began constructing around it. I got a proof of concept working with the app successfully requesting and parsing JSON data from the server, but the project was put on hold during the run up to the summer exam period. I plan to have a working prototype done by the end of the summer holidays.

## Reflection

I think I've learned a lot in just a few years. I still remember using PHP for the first time and thinking, "wow, look at all this stuff I can create!" Things have changed since then, and it's hard to look back on old projects I built without chuckling at how simple they seem compared to what I can build today with better tools and more experience. Incidentally, I did find it funny during those web-dev labs in my first year of university where everyone complained about how rubbish PHP was, and that I was one of only a few who could actually use it kind of well!