---
date: 29/07/2019
summary: While on holiday in Portugal, I decided I wanted to take control of my own digital navigation, and set out to prototype a quick mapping application for iPhone.
type: project
tags: swift;waypoint;programming
---

# What have I been developing this week? - Waypoint (iOS)

>  [Will Turner](https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0089217/?ref_=tt_trv_qu): How can we sail to an island that nobody can find with a compass that doesn't work? 
>
>  [Mr. Gibbs](https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0573618/?ref_=tt_trv_qu): Aye, the compass doesn't point North. But we're not trying to find North, are we? 
>
> — Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003)

Getting around while on holiday has become orders of magnitude easier thanks to smartphones and advanced mapping and location tracking technologies like Google Maps and Apple Maps. You search for a location and, before you know it, you're wired up with turn-by-turn directions and an estimated duration. 

That's all well and good, but what if you don't want to have your face in your phone following the directions as they come up? I don't know about everybody else, but I like to to look around as I walk, and keep my phone as far from my hands as I can. Moreover, I like having a general idea of where I'm going most of the time. That is, I know I have to turn right along this road, I just don't remember exactly which right turn it is.

So here's the problem statement: I wanted to build an app quickly with a big map interface where, when you long press on a location it marks a 20-metre radius. When the device enters the marked region, vibrate a few times to remind me that I'm approaching the turn. As an aside, I believe this already exists with Apple Maps and Apple Watch with the watch vibrating when new directions occur. What I envisioned was kind of like a waypoint in video game maps; the user clicks a location and a marker appears so they know where to go, hence the project name: Waypoint.

I planned to reuse some mapping code from an old tutorial I followed when I started learning Swift. The app I built then already had a long press detector and the location manager code, so I just had to build the app specific features. I started by creating a list to store the locations created by the long press event. These were stored as a string in the original app, but I needed to access the saved location coordinates, so I replaced the string with a class representing a stored location. This lead to issues with the storing of custom objects to the UserDefaults storage since objects must conform to the NSObject and NSCoding protocols by implementing methods for encoding and decoding to the NSData type. This took me down a rabbit hole of dealing with NSData and how NSUserDefaults actually works, and I was about ready to give up when I found a great post about using a struct conforming to the Codable protocol and just letting Swift handle the encoding and decoding. The resulting struct looked far more manageable and concise:

```swift
struct StoredAnnotation: Codable {
        
        var lat: CLLocationDegrees
        var lon: CLLocationDegrees
        var subThoroughfare: String
        var thoroughfare: String
        var subLocality: String
        var subAdminArea: String
        var postCode: String
        var country: String
        
        init(lat: CLLocationDegrees, lon: CLLocationDegrees, subThoroughfare: String, thoroughfare: String, subLocality: String, subAdminArea: String, postCode: String, country: String) {
            self.lat = lat
            self.lon = lon
            self.subThoroughfare = subThoroughfare
            self.thoroughfare = thoroughfare
            self.subLocality = subLocality
            self.subAdminArea = subAdminArea
            self.postCode = postCode
            self.country = country
        }
    }
```

Next, I wanted to handle deleting a waypoint marker by tapping on it. I used the _"didSelect view: MKAnnotationView"_ function to add custom behaviour. It didn't take long for me to realise, however, that the event wasn't firing. After some searching, I found that I had forgotten to set the map view delegate to the view controller when the view loaded even though the controller conformed to the MKMapViewDelegate protocol. It looked like the original app didn't do this either, so either it never came up, or more likely, I had set the delegate through the interface builder. In any case, adding the line below fixed the issue:

```swift
mapView.delegate = self
```

I also wanted to add a circle to the map indicating the area where the device would have to be located to alert the user. I set this up using an MKOverlay centred on the coordinates of the long press, and used a CLRegion to begin monitoring the marked area. The issue arose when I wanted to delete a waypoint or I restarted the app; the circular regions would not appear since rendering only occured when a point was created. I considered storing them in the struct above, but the main problems with this were increasing the amount of storage the app would consume for something that could be regenerated, and also the MKOverlay I would be storing does not conform to the Codable protocol, so that idea was a non-starter.

Instead, I created an array of dictionaries containing the overlay for each point and a string with the coordinates of the point. When a point was created, or more importantly, retrieved from storage, the overlay would be created and saved to the array in a dictionary. When the point was tapped and deleted, the overlay could be popped from the list and removed from the map. This had the benefit of not having to store all the overlays permanently, and being able to delete them when necessary using some list filtering.

By this point, I had an almost functioning app. It was a little rough around the edges, but it was ready for a field test. As luck would have it, I was stuck on a three-hour coach ride, so I could set waypoints along the road and test the app without having to stop every few metres if I were walking. Things were looking stable; no crashes, but also no alerts for entering the regions. I checked and double-checked my code. Everything seemed ok, so I looked online to see if anyone had run into this issue. According to a quatation from Apple found on [this](https://www.devfright.com/using-the-clcircularregion-to-setup-a-geo-fence/) blog: 

> "The specific threshold distances are determined by the hardware and the location technologies that are currently available. For example, if Wi-Fi is disabled, region monitoring is significantly less accurate. However, for testing purposes, you can assume that the minimum distance is approximately 200 meters."

I really wish I had known about that 200m minimum distance when I started… On the plus side, the app was pretty good at telling me when I had left a region after 20 seconds! Overall, however, the project would seem to have been a failure. Since this 200m minimum distance is practically baked into the system, there doesn't seem to be any way of getting more accurate region monitoring, so it would appear my original app idea won't cut it.

## Last stop, end of the line

I do have a couple of ideas for how to get around the 200m issue. One possibility is to use a hollow circle region as a waypoint such that, at a walking pace, the device would have left the region about 20 seconds before the change in direction. This wouldn't be ideal, though, since the device would pass through the monitored region twice, and would hence alert the user twice, which might cause confusion. Another idea is to investigate how the Apple Maps/Watch pair are so precise and try to replicate that. Either way, the holiday is almost over, so I probably won't make too much progress on this project until the next time I go to a foreign city and want to see the sights on my way to the right turning!