---
date: 01/09/2019
summary: Star Wars Battlefront (2004) is possibly my favourite video game of all time. It may be dated, it may be buggy, it may be outclassed in every way by its successors and competitors, but it's mine. So, when a friend informed me it was finally available on Steam, how could I resist the urge to relive a part of my childhood?
type: blog
tags: gaming
---

# What have I been playing this month? - Star Wars Battlefront (PC)

> "There is no place like home." - Dorothy, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900)

About a month ago, a good friend of mine tried for the umpteenth time to persuade me to get the latest Star Wars Battlefront game. Since its release in 2017, the sequel to EA's first attempt at reviving the Battlefront franchise, my friend has been trying to convince me to buy it. As it didn't seem to have the features that attracted me to its predecessors, I turned him down for the umpteenth time. As the conversation shifted to what I enjoyed of the original games from 2004 and 2005, my friend pointed out that the first game was released on Steam a few weeks prior, finally joining its sequel which had been on the store for years. This was a no-brainer purchase for me; I'd been waiting for this to happen for years, and before I you could say "take us to lightspeed" I was playing all the classic maps I used to play on the PlayStation 2 years ago! Fans of modern shooters would likely feel out of place in this game; there are no sprinting or stamina mechanics, no score streaks (a la Call of Duty), no natural health regeneration, but I didn't care - this was like coming home after a long time away.

## Begun, the Clone War has

A few days later, as I was on a plane leaving for a holiday, I recalled how much fun I'd had over the past few days reliving memories when it occurred to me that, even though these games are now fifteen years old, I'd never completed their campaigns. With several hours to kill on the flight, I retrieved my laptop and got started. Unfortunately, I hadn't yet downloaded the first game, so I had to start with the 2005 entry, Battlefront II. Things started off pretty shaky, not least because I had limited physical space available and had to use a trackpad to aim! Still, I adapted, and managed to make some good progress through the missions.

The campaign is a story told through the eyes of a retired clone trooper from the Grand Army of the Republic. Each mission in the campaign refers to an event the trooper recounts as part of a journal, detailing both the events of each military engagement and also his personal feelings as a soldier on the front lines. What I found particularly chilling was how on a number of occasions he refers to his and his fellow troops' admiration of the Jedi Knights, yet as loyal soldiers of the Republic, they followed their orders and killed the Jedi as part of the rise of the Galactic Empire (Note: this game predates the Clone Wars TV programme and the introduction of the 'control chips' which forced the clones to obey orders). About halfway into the campaign, the trooper speaks of storming of the Jedi Temple after which the Republic was reorganised into the Empire. From this point on, the trooper recounts his days as an Imperial Stormtrooper, and the story shifts as he refers to keeping order within the Empire and dealing with the growing threat of the Rebel Alliance. 

Notably, each mission ends on some kind of high note for the trooper. Even if that note is simply "Some of us survived but the rest were killed", the campaign lacks a major moment of defeat since the trooper obviously lived to tell his story. As a result, the last mission involves assaulting the Rebel base on Hoth from Episode V. The mission itself, as well as the cutscenes where the trooper shares his views on what happened, is not bad. As the last mission, it's quite difficult. There are a lot of objectives, and most are races against the clock to stop the Rebels from escaping. What feels a bit off is that the campaign ends here, completely omitting the Battle of Endor in Episode VI. I suspect this is because the Empire suffers its critical defeat at the hands of the Rebellion, and there was no way to have the trooper still alive or in any position later to tell the story the player experiences. I understand why the campaign ends where it does, but if I had any criticisms, it would be that it ends a little abruptly, and on a note of victory for the Empire when, in fact, it was nearing its end.

## Once more unto the breach

Now back at home, and having finished the Battlefront II campaign, I decided I would beat the original Battlefront campaign too. Battlefront (2004) technically has two campaigns, one for the Clone Wars, and one for the Galactic Civil War (Empire v Rebels). When I say campaign, instead of a story with a plot like Battlefront II, instead I mean "play and beat the multiplayer maps in sequence, and you can't choose which faction to play as". Things were simpler back then... I thought this would be a piece of cake; after all, I was pretty good at most of the maps, and all I had to do was win. No objectives, no plot to fit with; just win. The first few levels were not too tricky, though they gave me some trouble since I was on the hardest difficulty for a challenge. The first map that made me think I'd bitten off more than I could chew was Geonosis: the planet where the droid troops were manufactured. This one took me a couple of days to bash through. Still, I wasn't worried, since the _next_ map was my favourite: Kamino, home to the cloning facilities for the Republic Army. This one, I thought, was in the bag.

What followed was not just the worst defeat I think I've ever faced in these games, but the worst _two weeks_ of defeats! That's right; on my best map I was being completely obliterated for two weeks trying to progress. I could not understand what was going wrong. This was the map where I had the most experience and knowledge; it should have been a walk in the park. I tried different strategies, new tricks, read guides, looked up hints, and watched walkthroughs, all to no avail. I just couldn't beat this level. The saddest part was that the faction you play as in this mission starts with a numerical advantage in terms of troops over the other faction... After multiple floor-wiping defeats, I was prepared to call it quits. I would try once more, then give up. I can't recall doing much different in terms of tactics and fighting, but something must have changed since our faction completely overwhelmed the enemy. It was a surreal feeling; after two weeks of crushing losses, suddenly, out of nowhere, we just... won. In a strange way, it almost felt disappointing!

Pushing on, after another week of gameplay, I managed to fight my way to the end of the Clone Wars campaign. I had been dreading the mission after Kamino, but it was surprisingly tame after the carnage that had preceded it. I moved on with haste to the Galactic Civil War campaign, eager to add Battlefront to my growing list of completed games. I got to the fourth mission, the arena on Yavin IV (where the Rebels launched their attack on the first Death Star in Episode IV), where the situation took a nose dive. I can't remember _ever_ beating this map - much less on hard - so it wasn't a surprise when I got my backside handed to me repeatedly. Beating this level was going to take some serious skill and planning, so I put the game back on the shelf as an intriguing sale caught my eye.

## Never say never

As I mentioned at the start of this post, my friend has been pressing me to buy the latest Battlefront game from 2017, Battlefront II (yeah, that name isn't misleading _at all!_ ) For various reasons, I've turned him down each time he has brought it up. My main issue was that the 2017 version didn't have much in the way of single player content. There was a campaign, but that received pretty poor reviews, and the "jump right into an offline match against the AI like the old games from 2004" feature was notably absent. Even the 2015 version had something like that. What put me off further was that I had been looking forward to the 2015 entry, and had pre-ordered the collectors edition which included all the paid-for extra maps. At the time, I didn't mind spending the money, but what frustrated me later was that none of those extra maps were available in the single player modes. To be fair, EA never stated that would be the case, but it left the game feeling unfinished in my eyes. That left both the 2015 and 2017 entries with basically only multiplayer online content, which doesn't generally interest me.

During the last set of sales, my friend tried to persuade me yet again, stating that the game was discounted to only €20, and that the "instant action" mode I had wanted from the older games was now on the roadmap for September this year. He had my attention, I admitted, but that would still be a €20 gamble on an unreleased feature, and I could put that money toward something else. I told my friend I'd wait until the feature was added and see what would happen. I also mentioned that, if the price came down further - say, to €5 - I would likely buy the game without thinking about it, since I'd get the campaign out of it if nothing else. A few days later, I became aware of a massive sale on Origin, the online storefront which hosts the two newer Battlefront games. Since Battlefront II was now discounted to €4.49, I made good on my assertion and bought it. I set it downloading overnight (since it is over 70Gb in size), and came back the next day to get started on the story.

The campaign follows the exploits of Imperial special forces group 'Inferno Squad' during the events leading up to and in the year following the Battle of Endor in Episode VI. Most missions have the player as the leader of the squad, Iden Versio, but some missions instead are from the perspectives of fan-favourite Star Wars characters like Han Solo and Princess Leia Organa, albeit for the purpose of exploring more about Inferno Squad. While it is fun to run around as the famous characters, I feel the story sometimes loses its focus on Versio and her team. Perhaps this will change as the story progresses, but I'm only about halfway through at the moment.

While I don't want this post to turn into a review of the game, I feel there are some aspects I should comment on. First, the graphics, environments, and models are spectacular. Regardless of what you might say about the gameplay or story, the game is extremely pretty to look at. As a digital photography enthusiast, the Nvidia Ansel photo capture integration is also a great inclusion for those looking to make there own digital Star Wars artwork who don't necessarily have access to modelling or photography tools and skills. Ansel's in-game photo mode allows for full 3D camera movement around the player, and its customisable and layered filters allow for customising that perfect shot. Two features I didn't expect were the ability to add cinematic depth-of-field, and to change the field of view using sliders. I can't wait to play around more with Ansel photography.

Another standout aspect of the game is its soundtrack. The first games from 2004 and 2005 had no original scores of their own, instead relying on tracks from the six (five, at the time of the first game) films. This changed in 2015 when Battlefront shipped with a soundtrack that included film music and its own score from composer Gordy Haab. Since the game didn't have a campaign or any story elements at all, most of the music is either thematic for a specific planet, or incidental to the action. I have it in my library, but it's not something you would likely listen to on its own. Battlefront II (2017) however, has upped the ante; Haab returned to score the new entry to the franchise, and I think his soundtrack is wonderful. There are a few tracked pieces from the (now) eight main saga films, but these are kept to a minimum since Haab uses them as inspiration for his own original pieces. The Battlefront (2015) theme can also be heard a few times, introducing a sense of continuity, and there are a lot of times in tracks from the soundtrack where one can hear something inspired from somewhere in the film scores. One track even draws inspiration from the film Solo, which I thought was a nice touch, though the highlight is a track that includes inspiration from most of the eight films as a musical evolution of the Star Wars factions.

Lastly, I have to praise the space combat. Air combat in Battlefront (2015) - at least, in the non-DLC maps - felt a little restricted and watered down since there were no space maps. In Battlefront II, space maps have been added, and I really like the full 3D movement, as well as the feel of each ship. Tie fighters and X-wings are appropriately nimble, and the Millennium Falcon handles like a brick as one would expect. It may not be a proper space flight simulator, but I think the designers did a good job with space maps and combat. I've already mentioned the game's excellent graphics, but I have to say the campaign mission where the player is in a tie fighter flying through the wreckage of the second Death Star above Endor is both incredible and chilling.

## Final thoughts

I have a lot of work to do to finish the Battlefront (2004) and Battlefront II (2017) campaigns before the summer ends. As it stands, I'm having a lot of fun both reliving old experiences in one of my all-time favourite games, and forging new memories in a game that is entertaining and visually spectacular. With about three weeks of down-time left before term starts, I think I might just about make it, but I'll have to make sure I'm not distracted with photography in Ansel! I'm especially hoping to learn more about Inferno Squad and their exploits, and I'm eagerly awaiting the new 'instant action' mode that will hopefully be released in September.

_There are many games still left on my to-play list, and I hope for this to be a regular style of post. That said, if you have any recommendations for games I should play, please feel free to mention them in the comments. Game on!_ 