---
date: 31/03/2020
summary: Time flies when there are a gazillion and one things to do! These past few months have been so incredibly hectic in terms of University work that I've had almost no time to reflect on and write about what has been going on.
type: blog
tags: programming;swift;blog
---

# What haven't I been working on this season - Project update

> "It's life, Melanie." - Jake Sisko
>
> "And you can miss it if you don't open your eyes." - Melanie

Towards the tail end of 2019, University work was quite concentrated in the last few weeks of the term. It caught me off guard as I was in the middle of preparing two posts on updates I had been performing on my website and Psakse such that I had to put all my writing on the back burner. I plan to release those posts soon (work permitting, of course), but first, a short update on what has been going on over the Winter season.

## Blog updates

Since this will serve as the main topic for my next post, I'll keep things brief. My goal last term was to strip out as much PHP from my website as possible. As best I could, I tried to decouple the server logic from the frontend (because that's a terrible way to build anyway...) and replace inline server calls with AJAX to improve loading times. I also took the opportunity to rebuild the administration pages to improve my experience adding and editing posts. A new 'Projects' section was added to show off some of my work in a more convenient interface.

More than once I was asked "Why don't you leave it as is?" True, I could have just left everything as it was and no-one would know, but - perfectionism aside - my roadmap is to eventually migrate away from my current hosting platform to one that supports servers written in Swift so I can finally end my reliance on PHP. In the meantime, I investigated Vaux, a Swift library that provides a Domain Specific Language (DSL) for writing HTML in Swift. I tested it by implementing my front page and the results are seamless! The future of this website is looking good, I think.

## Psakse platform parity

Time has been kind to the non-iOS versions of Psakse. Before University work took all of my time and attention, I had started writing a post on how the macOS and Android versions of Psakse now have all the features of the iOS version, including the curated list of challenge puzzles. While it may not seem like the list of puzzles was the hardest thing to implement, it was up there; tables in Appkit and Android are pretty useless to work with compared to the iOS version, and updating a user interface in Android from the result of a networking process is unnecessarily convoluted. I'm sure the actual post will go into more excruciating detail about the whole thing, but for the moment I'm happy all the versions are on equal footing. My future plans involve making the entire UI more appealing, and implementing a Windows version, maybe using Kotlin Native if I have the time in the next few months.

## Open-GL Clock

This project is notable in that it's the first University coursework I ~~have any reason~~ get to talk about on my blog, though I wouldn't expect a full article on it. The coursework for our Computer Graphics module was to implement one of eight small projects in C++/OpenGL from a list of options including a Tetris game, a Snake game, a clock, and a rollercoaster, among other things. I went for the clock since I instantly knew what I wanted it to look like. I planned to model it on a clock from my grandparents' house; the clock now sits on my desk back home, and it was the perfect inspiration.

I started by implementing a basic digital clock in the style of a seven-segment display. Using namespacing and the good coding practices I had picked up from working with the Unreal Engine I made a modular system for representing the time so I could quickly produce the current time and a toggleable stopwatch. I added a few analogue faces with the same philosophy of modularity and included a way to swap between them. The tricky part was switching from OpenGL 2D to 3D perspective mode halfway through the project. I was using the fixed graphics pipeline (because the lab work for the module only taught that...), but I was fortunate in that the way I had engineered my classes and namespaces meant only minor changes were needed to migrate everything to 3D. Score 1 for good coding practices!

The actual clock model was made in Blender and imported as a list of vertices using the TinyObjLoader library from Syoyo. The model consisted of a half cube with an inset square face to give a shape resembling a frame. Once imported, placing the model and the clock faces in the same transformation group meant I could move the entire clock (which was still made of separate entities) as one object within the scene. Lastly, I tried to implement a calendar according to the specification, but I fell over at the last hurdle when I couldn't figure out how to manipulate text as a 3D object in the world. Still, I got a good mark, and I think the final result looks quite good for a first project with an unknown (and incredibly antiquated) library. Due to University regulations, I'm unable to provide the source on GitHub, which is a shame because I'm quite proud overall.

## Git-Sync

A project that likely will have a post associated with it at some point (when I can get it to work, that is) is Git-Sync, a multi-device tool for quickly recreating multi-project environments. For context, it has been about a year since I started using Git properly. It has also been around 9 months since I stopped storing my Git repositories in my OneDrive folder (yes, I understand now why this is bad). While this move has made my OneDrive and Git management much more sane, I miss being able to device-hop and have everything exactly where I left it in terms of which projects are on the device and where they are on my drive.

Enter Git-Sync, a small program that produces and reads a modifiable file that represents the directory hierarchy one might want for a list of Git projects. On first run the program will, once authenticated, get a list of all repositories for a GitHub user and produce a JSON file representing a directory with every repository on the top level. The user can then modify the file to add new directories to keep repositories organised and can also control which repositories are cloned and which are ignored. Running the program will then create the appropriate structure from the file and clone the repositories to the right locations. The program can be run again later to update the file with new repositories in a non-destructive way. The idea is that using Git-Sync with this file will allow a user to quickly recreate their multi-project environment on multiple machines without having to manually create the directory structure and remember which repositories should be cloned to which locations. It might not be as seamless as OneDrive, but it does come without the headaches of OneDrive syncing all the Git files and potentially breaking a repository in the process.

## Conclusions

Unfortunately, while I would love to devote all my time to personal projects like Git-Sync and my website, work at University over the past two terms has been heavy. Between multiple coursework deadlines in the final weeks of the term, as well as the Third-year Project (which I really want to talk about in an article soon), everything has been in quite a high gear for a long time. However, now that term is over and I finally have some time to myself again, I look forward to working on my own projects and returning to writing which I find cathartic and relaxing.