---
date: 19/09/2018
summary: After discovering a pretty awesome-looking LCARS style web development kit, I spent most of the summer developing a Star Trek themed web application for organising my original character fiction.
type: project
tags: web;programming;sto-db
---

# What have I been developing this summer? – Star Trek Character Database (Web), Part One

Before we start, I should clear something up: I am a massive Star Trek fan. I love all the series (yes, the new one too), most of the films (yes, the new ones too…) and it is my favourite franchise of all time. However, I do appreciate Star Trek and science fiction may not be everyone’s cup of tea, so I’d like to issue a disclaimer: If you like web development you’ll probably find at least part of this article interesting, but if Sci-Fi or Star Trek bore you to tears, save yourself the time and skip this one.

With that out of the way, a bit of history: I was first introduced to Star Trek about a decade ago. At the time my passion for another of Sci-Fi’s most renowned behemoths, Star Wars, was fading. My parents introduced me to Star Trek, and I instantly fell in love with it. Not only was it excellent quality commentary on humans and society, it was more realistic and more grounded than Star Wars, and it addressed important and relevant issues. It also showed technology that was far more similar to ours than anything in Star Wars, and I particularly liked how computer interaction was depicted. Each species with computer technology in Star Trek has a unique interface style, and the faction with which humanity is aligned – the United Federation of Planets – is no exception; most Federation vessels and installations are operated using the Library Computer Access and Retrieval System, or LCARS for short.

Like modern operating systems of today, such as Windows and macOS, LCARS is used to control and manage connected systems as well as to collect, store, and modify data. However, unlike the systems of today, access to LCARS is primarily through touchscreen terminals located throughout a facility or ship, or through voice interaction with an artificial intelligence. While these technologies exist today, digital voice-enabled assistants such as Apple’s Siri or Amazon’s Alexa are nowhere near as capable as the fictional LCARS equivalent, and though touchscreens are increasingly being used in place of older methods of user interaction, there are currently no touchscreen-only operating systems designed for extended use in work environments. Some may argue that although touchscreen mobile devices have become ubiquitous in the workplace, and devices like Microsoft’s Surface line of tablet PCs have become office favourites, I have yet to hear of any largescale pushes to replace keyboards and mice in favour of a completely touch-based method of interaction.

Perhaps the most significant reason for the difference between LCARS and modern operating systems in terms of physical interaction is the user interface. Over the last few years, companies like Microsoft have been modifying their systems to support both touch and keyboard by increasing the size of the interface when touch is used. This makes things like pressing buttons easier, and it has in fact been part of the Apple iOS design specification for several years now to have a minimum size for elements which can be tapped on. In contrast, LCARS does not need to adapt or allow for minimum sizes like this: it is a fully touch-based system with a distinct and established design language focusing on large, identifiable areas for interaction. It is a page-based view system – meaning different elements are tiled on the screen – as opposed to the windowed approach popular in today’s computers. Overall, this sounds incredibly complex to implement as an entire operating system (though [people](https://www.lcars47.com) are trying!) and would certainly not be compatible with most current systems today.

Enter the web-application. GitHub user Aricwithana has created a marvellous visual framework for implementing the LCARS style on the modern web. This software development kit (SDK) does not provide functionality in the sense that you can write a program with it; rather you use it to build a website’s visual layout, then create the functionality yourself using other methods. As a visual library trying to remain authentic to a fictional computer in a television show, the SDK is quite faithful – taking liberties only where some elements can’t be recreated effectively or didn’t exist in the show but must exist for our purposes – and is incredibly flexible and customisable. It is built in jQuery, a popular and robust JavaScript framework that is intuitive to learn and implement on the web. Each element created by the user on a page is defined with specific attributes like type, styling, templates (more complex structures that can be defined once then used anywhere), and children. This final attribute is especially useful for nesting elements and creating web-appropriate structures. For example, a row element could have children being a logo, some text, then a bar of solid colour. These elements would then be rendered in the browser in a single row appearing in the above order.

When I first discovered this SDK, I didn’t have any idea what to do with it. As a kit, it looked like fun to use and experiment with, but I didn’t have a plan to build something specific. Initially, as my jQuery was quite rubbish at the time, I tried using the HTML-only method of building a page. This took hours to produce anything decent and was certainly not feasible in the long term, so I made the switch to the jQuery version before I’d made too much progress on a layout and managed to recreate the same page in around half an hour. Without much of a direction, however, progress was still slow, so I decided to set myself a task: I would build a simple page containing all the details of the story behind my player character in Star Trek Online, a free-to-play massively multiplayer online game set in the Star Trek universe. The page would be laid out much like a Wikipedia page with a profile picture, summary details, and information divided into subheadings. As the character, Talia, had already been planned, I already had a photo and some information to use, so all I had to do was design a layout and implement it.

I referred to some images of LCARS in use displaying officer biographies in the various series for inspiration and set out to organise my layout in a similar way, with the character’s image and details on the right of the screen, and the main text justified below the character’s reversed name at the top-left of the viewport. While the layout wasn’t too tricky to build, I did encounter two problems I hadn’t expected. First, the justified text wouldn’t wrap around the details and photo. Rather, the text would keep its current justification and the space below the details would be empty. I managed to fix this using some CSS trickery with the order in which the elements are rendered on the page: instead of setting the children of the viewport to be the text then the details, the two would be reversed and the details would have the CSS property “float: right;" so that they would be pushed to the rightmost edge of the viewport. Since the details were now outside the regular flow of the document, the biography text would wrap around it properly. The second problem was one I probably should have predicted, but it slipped my mind until I tried to load the page and the JavaScript failed to load. The text I had written for the biography contained apostrophes (otherwise known as single quotes). This text was hardcoded into the page as a string which was denoted by single quotes. What had happened when I tried to load the page was that the jQuery tried to read the text from the first quote and stopped at the next one which was supposed to be part of the text. Since it wasn’t escaped (forced to be regarded as text instead of a special symbol) the jQuery stopped reading the rest of the text as text and treated it as part of the page structure but didn’t know what it was supposed to do since it was not part of the script. After putting a backslash character before each apostrophe, the page finally rendered correctly, and my goal had been reached.

While I was pleased with the outcome, I was not exactly satisfied, so I extended the target: the page would be updated to show the biographies and details of all the characters aboard the ship, and there would be a toggleable panel for selecting which crew member of which to view the details. I reused the code for setting up an individual character page, populated each of the nine new pages with a sentence or two of details, then set to work on creating a selector panel. At first, I created a horizontal pane with two rows of five hard-coded buttons each. When a button was pressed, the viewport would load the appropriate page without refreshing. While it was adequate for this task, it wasn’t particularly responsive or extensible. Resizing the window would make the buttons much smaller or larger than intended, and often resulted in buttons clipping over each other if they became too small. In addition, the number of buttons per row was always five regardless of the width of the row, meaning the panel would not move buttons in response to window size. Had this been the case, a large width would lead to only one row of buttons being needed, while an extremely narrow viewport would result in as many rows as there were buttons. Clearly this was not practical beyond this scenario, so I instead developed a vertical panel with each button in its own row. The buttons and the panel were set to a fixed width, and the panel was set to scroll in the event the height of buttons exceeded the height of the panel. Lastly, I adjusted the width and padding of the panel to hide the scroll bar (if it exists), and was then left with a more practical, extensible, and visually appealing method of switching between pages.

Patting myself on the back for a job well done, I began using this system to add more information to the characters and make them more realistic. To add more detail, I would open the JavaScript file containing all the ‘records’ and edit the hardcoded text values, but as I added to each character – and added characters – the file became larger and more difficult to navigate, so I began to think of ways to solve this problem. A few ideas came to mind, but only one seemed to strike a nice balance between practicality, extensibility, and ease of implementation: an SQL database. 

Keep an eye out for the second part of this blog where I discuss how I set up an appropriate relational database on a virtualised LAMP stack, and retrofitted PHP into the page to populate pages automatically!

Click [here](https://sto-database.co.uk) to visit the application and try it out for yourself!
