---
date: 18/07/2020
summary: Taking a break from preparing my first App Store release, I decided to take on a two-day challenge to build an app.
type: project
tags: swift;programming
---

# Two Day App Build Challenge - Arrowverse Watchlist (iOS)

> "My name is Barry Allen, and I'm the fastest man alive." - Barry Allen

Over the last month, I have been preparing my first App Store submission-worth app. Not to go into too many details (because I am preparing an entire post dedicated to it), but this app is the most complete example of an iOS app that I have ever built, and I am hopeful I can post it soon onto the App Store. The app has been my main focus for about a month over the difficult quarantine period, but - as much as I can chip away at a project forever - I needed a little something to break up the flow. Enter my two-day app-build challenge: I get an idea for a cool little app or utility and set aside two days to build a minimum viable product (MVP). It doesn't have to be perfect or bug-free or App Store-worthy, but it does have to work, and be a decent example of what I can do despite time constraints. I hope to do these every so often to keep my skills sharp, so feel free to send suggestions for small projects my way. 

As a first challenge, I wanted to do something to assist me in following the latest television franchise I've begun watching: the Arrowverse. For the uninitiated, the "Arrowverse" is the name given to the collection of television programmes from the DC franchise (think Batman and Superman) starting with the now concluded 2012 show "Arrow", and its various spin-offs: The Flash, Constantine, DC's Legends of Tomorrow, Supergirl, and Batwoman, as well as the recently added Black Lightning, and various animated instalments such as Vixen, and Freedom Fighters: The Ray. As well as being known for their portrayals of popular characters from the original comics, the Arrowverse shows are also notable for their connectedness and annual crossover episodes. These crossovers are like the comics where each episode in the crossover arc takes place in a different series. Because of how linked the shows are, and how often they reference each others' events and characters, it's important to watch the episodes in the right order. As it happens, this is as easy as watching them in their original airing order. To assist the stalwart among us who insist on paralellising the watching of all the shows, [AceFire6](https://github.com/AceFire6) has an [online listing](https://arrowverse.info) of every episode from every show in the correct order. For the most part, this is the guide I've been following when watching.

## The Challenge

The online listing of episodes is a great utility for those who want to watch everything in the correct order. The user interface is pleasant and easy to use, and there are some nice features thrown in, like a filter to remove shows you may not be interested in, and each episode links to the appropriate wiki page for those who want more information beyond a name and air date. However, as great as this utility is, it's missing the two things I really need: first, a checklist so I can mark off episodes I've seen; second, a way to show me the next episode I need to watch from each show at a glance. I also want to have this available on my phone for easy access, so instead of forking and reengineering the Python web app, I decided to build a similar utility as an iOS app in Swift.

To claim I had succeeded in my goal by the end of the two allotted days, I set myself some targets: the app should have a complete episode listing like the website. It should also have some kind of show filter, and it must have a way to store the user's watched and unwatched progress locally on device. Finally, there should be a way to see which episode is next for each show, ordered by air date to ensure you always watch everything in the right order. As an aside, I noticed after I had started working that the original project used some fancy manipulation to handle a few problematic episodes that aired on the same day or were part of a crossover arc. For the purpose of the challenge, I decided to completely ignore this since I would have to look up exactly how the episodes aired and manually put them in the right order, which would be a whole other can of worms.

## Day One: Fetching Data

I decided to use the original project as a jumping-off point from which to begin my app. I started by investigating how the site obtained its information to populate the listings. On inspection of the source code, I discovered that the episodes of each show except for Black Lightning are pulled from the respective season and episode listing page on the arrow.fandom wiki page. The episodes from Black Lightning are pulled from the analogous page on Wikipedia. I suspect the reason for this is that Black Lightning has only been part of the Arrowverse since the latest crossover, so not all (or in fact any) of its episodes may have been listed on arrow.fandom when the site was built. At any rate, I decided it was best not to reinvent the wheel, and try to get the data for each series into my app in a similar way. I started with a simple network request to pull the contents of the page into a string (because I don't believe there's an API to request the data on its own). 

Printing the string to the console, I quickly realised parsing the text would be a nightmare. I looked at the original project for inspiration, but it seemed to call on some library for handling this kind of thing. A quick search revealed that a similar library exists for Swift, called [SwiftSoup](https://github.com/scinfu/SwiftSoup). SwiftSoup is a parsing system used to extract data from raw HTML, leveraging - in addition to the standard HTML tags - classes, ids, and other types of selectors to identify the correct portion of the document and retrieve the data. Using the original project source as guidance, locating and extracting all the episodes for each show proved quite easy; even for Black Lightning, where the document structure from Wikipedia was slightly different. After finishing the fetching system, I set about creating a struct to represent an individual object, but not before doing a bit of preemptive clean-up.

Up to this point, I had hard-coded all eight URLs of the shows I wanted to fetch episodes for. Since the URL is only one of many unique properties I knew each show would have in the final app, I refactored the URLs into the variables of an enum representing all the shows my app would support:

```swift
enum Show: String, CaseIterable {
    case Arrow, Constantine, Flash, Legends
    case Supergirl, Vixen, BlackLightning, Batwoman
}
```

Using the enum above meant I could simplify the process of fetching all the episodes by iterating over all the cases using the `CaseIterable` protocol conformance. 

```swift
private var baseURL: String {
    switch self {
        case .BlackLightning: return "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/"
        default: return "https://arrow.fandom.com/wiki/"
    }
}

private var episodeListURL: String {
    switch self {
        case .Arrow: return "List_of_Arrow_episodes"
        case .Constantine: return "List_of_Constantine_episodes"
        case .Flash: return "List_of_The_Flash_(The_CW)_episodes"
        case .Legends: return "List_of_DC's_Legends_of_Tomorrow_episodes"
        case .Supergirl: return "List_of_Supergirl_episodes"
        case .Vixen: return "List_of_Vixen_episodes"
        case .BlackLightning: return "List_of_Black_Lightning_episodes"
        case .Batwoman: return "List_of_Batwoman_episodes"
    }
}

var url: URL {
  	return URL(string: "\(self.baseURL)\(self.episodeListURL)")!
}
```

By adding the URL as a property of the enum, I could fetch all the episodes of every show in a single for-loop. I could also simplify my data parsing code using ternary operators to check if the show currently being fetched was from Wikipedia using the computed property:

```swift
var isFromWikipedia: Bool {
    switch self {
        case .BlackLightning: return true
        default: return false
    }
}
```

With my shows now type-safe, I moved back to storing the fetched episodes.

Initially, my `Episode` struct was quite simple. Since it was only to be used to store the fetched episodes in a list, I only wanted to keep the essential details:

```swift
struct Episode: CustomStringConvertible {
    init(_ show: Show, _ season: Int, _ number: Int, _ title: String, _ aired: Date) {
        self.show = show
        self.id = "S\(season < 10 ? "0" : "")\(season)E\(number < 10 ? "0" : "")\(number)"
        self.title = title
        self.aired = aired
    }
    
    let show: Show
    let id: String
    let title: String
    let aired: Date
    
    var description: String {
        return "\(show.name) \(id): \(title), \(aired)"
    }
}
```

Each episode needed to store the show it belonged to (now in convenient enum form!), and identifier of some kind, an episode title, and an air date. I decided on a string-based id of the form SxxExx which refers to season x, episode x with zero-padding to match the common representation used in the original project and on many sites containing episode listings for shows. The `aired` property would store the air date as a `Date` object to make sorting easier in the long term. Lastly, though it isn't necessary for the final product (but I left it in anyway), I added conformance to the `CustomStringConvertible` protocol to make printing lists of the struct to the console much easier to read. Notice, in the `description` property, `show.name` is used. This is a string representing the full name of the show. I later replaced this with `show.shortName`, a three-letter code I came up with to identify each show, similar to the abbreviations used in the Star Trek franchise to keep things concise. This was later also used in the `identifier` computed property for an episode to use as a database key:

```swift
var identifier: String {
  	return "\(show.shortName)-\(id)"
}
```

A quick test of fetching the data and storing it as a list of Episodes demonstrated that everything pretty much worked, but the dates were a little funky: all of them were exactly the same! To fix this, I set up a `DateFormatter` to convert the string date to an actual `Date`. The episode dates now looked more correct, but each one was set to a day before the actual air date. After looking through some posts on StackOverflow, I narrowed down my issue to setting a proper timezone and locale to the conversion process. My formatter ended up looking like this:

```swift
let formatter = DateFormatter()
let timezone = TimeZone(abbreviation: "GMT+0:00")!
formatter.locale = Locale(identifier: "en_US_POSIX")
formatter.timeZone = timezone
```

Notice the format of the date is not included here; this is because the format depends on whether the data is from Wikipedia or arrow.fandom. Back in the fetching code, I specified the format based on the `isFromWikipedia` property in the enum using a ternary operator:

```swift
formatter.dateFormat = "MMMM dd, yyyy\(show.isFromWikipedia ? " (yyyy-mm-dd)" : "")"
```

Had I thought about it more cleverly, I should set the date format in the enum as a computed property, but it slipped my mind. Below is what the neatest option would likely have looked like:

```swift
// in Show enum
var dateFormat: String {
  	return "MMMM dd, yyyy\(self.isFromWikipedia ? " (yyyy-mm-dd)" : "")"
}

// in fetch code
formatter.dateFormat = show.dateFormat
```

In any case, the app now had a proper list of episodes that could be filtered, and sorted by show, title, and air date. To get the episodes into airing order was as simple as sorting the list in place with:

``` swift
episodes.sort(by: { ($0.aired) < ($1.aired) })
```

Next up, I had to find a better way of presenting the list to the user than printing to some invisible console output.

## Story(board) Time

My experience with Xcode's Storyboard feature has been a little up and down from when I started iOS development to now. Thinking way back to Psakse, my first major iOS project, I can remember deciding Storyboard would be absolutely useless to me for building user interface. There was no way it could possibly be as powerful as writing all the UI in Swift. While doing user interface in Swift was (mostly) good for that project, it later came back to haunt me when I tried porting to macOS. I gained some valuable experiences ditching some of my Swift code in favour of reusable Storyboards during the porting process, but it wasn't until I began my latest iOS project (which I'll continue to not talk about here) that I really came to appreciate Storyboard as a powerful tool in the Xcode arsenal. In that project, I learned a lot of neat things about Storyboard, so I decided it would be a good idea to get some more practice under my belt in my challenge.

To start off, I took the default view controller and added a table view to it, constrained to the maximum size of the display. I connected the table view to my view controller class, set the delegate and data source properties, and implemented the data source functions as basically as I could in an extension. I also removed the default prototype cell that came with the table. I knew I would be using some kind of reusable cell view for the table, but since I discovered `xib` files (these are essentially reusable views contained in a single file), I prefer to use them over prototype cells since I can have a whole editor window to mess around with designs. Also, the `xib` editor doesn't load the whole Storyboard file, so it saves on load times for when I want to make quick changes to a cell, as much as it saves on visual clutter. 

The table view cell I wanted would be pretty simple to build. Like the original project my app was based on, I wanted each cell to display the episode title, air date, show name, and identifier. These would be quick, easy hits. Two labels, one above the other, with appropriate constraints, and the job was done. However, unlike the original project, I wanted my cells to also have an icon representing the show. This was important for me since I envisioned an unwatched episode having a background colour representing the show, while a watched episode would have a gray background. The icon, hence, would help differentiate the show without the user having to read. I added an image view to the left-hand side of the cell, and updated the labels' constraints to fit. Lastly, I created a class to represent my custom cell with two `UILabel` properties and a `UIImageView` property, each marked with the `@IBOutlet` annotation, and wired everything up. 

```swift
class ListViewCell: UITableViewCell {
    @IBOutlet weak var icon: UIImageView!
    @IBOutlet weak var title: UILabel!
    @IBOutlet weak var detail: UILabel!
}
```

Back in the view controller class, I revisited my basic implementations of the table view data source methods to create a new instance of my custom cell for each stored episode, and registered the `xib` view as a reusable cell for the table using:

```swift
listView.register(UINib(nibName: "ListViewCell", bundle: nil), forCellReuseIdentifier: "episode")
```

For the current stage of development, I also disabled interaction with the cells, even though I planned to later make tapping on the cell the method for marking an episode as watched or unwatched.

To finish off the cell, I wanted a way to set the background colour based on the show the episode belonged to. The original project's colour scheme is quite appealing, so I cracked open the web inspector and snagged the RGB colour values for use in the `Show` enum. I created a property that returned a new `UIColor`, and wired it into the `cellForRowAt` data source function so that each episode would be coloured correctly. To make the text stand out, I set the labels to have a white text colour, and also tested that this would work well with the gray colour I planned to use to denote a watched episode. With that all working, at least, in theory, it was time to run the app and see what it looked like.

Building and running the project, things were looking good, but the first cells visible on the screen were not rendering properly. I found that moving them off the screen, then back again made them render properly, but this didn't feel particularly slick. I'll admit solving this one took longer than it should have, but I eventually found a trick from my early days of working with tables and web requests:

```swift
DispatchQueue.main.async {
  	self.listView.reloadData()
}
```

The above code is used to refresh the table on the main thread (where UI lives) asynchronously (so, say, after a web request which may take a non-deterministic amount of time to complete). This means after each set of episodes is fetched, the table is reloaded with new data. Running the app now, all the cells rendered properly without the weird display issue.

## Iconic Features

With the exception of show-filtering, the app was almost on par with the original project in terms of features after a few hours of work. Wanting a break, I decided to strike out in search of the icons to use in the table cells. I found a few decent ones, but finding decent `png` ones was not happening. Taking the best icons I could find online, I navigated to my trusty photo editor to get rid of the rubbish white or checkered backgrounds. As an aside, let me just say that I unfortunately don't have Photoshop on my Mac, which is a shame since it's perfect for this kind of job. However, [Photopea](https://www.photopea.com/) is basically Photoshop, but online (I like to imagine the person in charge of the project brief for this site went into the meeting and said something along the lines of: "Guys, Photoshop, but it's a web app". If that guy isn't rich by now, I'll be disappointed...).

Anyway, I took an hour on not-Photoshop and cut out a bunch of icons to use in my app. This on its own is likely to mean I can't submit to the App Store for copyright reasons, but whatever. When I finished, I returned to Xcode and opened the `Assets.xcassets` file to create new named image sets. The `Assets.xcassets` file is a catalogue of resources that can be used in an app. A resource could be an image in multiple sizes, predefined colours, augmented reality assets, etc. For now, I only wanted images and colours. I imported the images (without bothering with multiple size classes, because this is a prototype), and returned to the `Show` enum to set up a computed property to return the appropriate icon as a UIImage. I also took the opportunity to refactor the colour property in the enum to use named colours in the `Assets.xcassets` file. I don't know if this makes the app more efficient, or anything, but it did make the code a bit easier to read. With that done, I headed back into the programming side to get filtering crossed off the list.

## Content Filtering

Filtering the episodes by show was not hard; by the way that I'd built the app thus far, particularly with the `Episode` struct, filtering was actually basically fully implemented. Printing to the console showed that filtering could be accomplished using (surprise, surprise) the `.filter()` function on the `show` property, so all there was to do was to implement the user interface for choosing the shows to track. I wanted to use a popover for this so the user wasn't moved to a completely new page. To start, I embedded the entire initial view controller with the episode table view in a navigation view controller to get a ready-made title bar with space for buttons. I know I could have just added the bar manually, but the extra controller doesn't add much overhead, and it handles all the view constraints for the bar automatically regardless of device size or orientation.

With space for some buttons, I added a bar button item to the top left, anchoring to a new view controller using a popover segue to give the illusion that the user was still on the same page, just in a different area. Regarding the new view controller, I planned to have a list of toggle-able buttons where each button represented a show. The button would display the show's title and icon, and the background colour would indicate if the show's episodes were being listed or not. I tried using a stack view to organise the buttons, but stacks come with some strange default constraints on subviews, so I went back to my trusty table view. At least the table view scrolls if not all the elements fit.

I thought about reusing my already designed cell view for the buttons, but that wouldn't work out of the box since I wanted some spacing between each button. Since you can't add spacing between cells in a table view (at least, I couldn't figure out how; if someone knows, please tell me!), I created a new cell view similar to the old one. However, this view only had one label for the show title, and also had a background view for setting the colour. Sure, I could have just set the cell view's background colour, but this way I could make the cell background transparent, and make the background view a little less tall than the cell height to give the illusion of spacing between cells. I created a class for the new cell view, wired everything together, and rebuilt the app. Now, pressing the button in the top-right corner of the screen presented a simple popover with a large, colourful button for each show.

As a final touch, I wanted to see if a popover could have that neat blurring effect Apple is so fond of these days. I added a `Visual Effect View` element to the back of the view stack, and set the main root view of the controller to have a transparent background, similar to what I had just done with the buttons. The result was quite a cool effect when opening the popover, since all the colours in the episode listing became blurred. This was especially neat in areas where multiple shows had episodes on screen at the same time, so the show selection page now looked much less bland and boring. I don't know if I'll use this in a production app, but it's good to know how simple this trick is to pull off!

As for the filtering mechanism, I decided it would be best to implement some kind of global state for recording the current set of shows being tracked by a user. This way, it would be easy to store the set in the `UserDefaults` storage so the user's preferences are not lost every time the app is stopped. I'll admit, this section of the code was probably the one that went through the most revisions (second, maybe, to the fetching code), so I'll only talk about the final version and my reasoning for doing things this way. First, I wanted the set of shows to be accessible from anywhere (for example, the listing page) so the code doesn't end up swamped with calls to `UserDefaults`. Second, I wanted an indicator of whether or not the set had changed so the app doesn't reload the list of episodes every time the user opens the select screen if it's unnecessary. I concluded it would be best to encapsulate both of these requirements in a struct using static variables. The final struct (after many redesigns and much refactoring) ended up as:

```swift
struct State {
    static var shows: Set<Show> = [
        .Arrow, .Constantine, .Flash, .Legends,
        .Supergirl, .Vixen, .BlackLightning, .Batwoman
    ] {
        willSet {
            shouldChange = false
            if newValue != shows {
                let str = newValue.map { $0.rawValue }
                UserDefaults.standard.set(str, forKey: "shows")
                shouldChange = true
            }
        }
    }
    
    static var shouldChange: Bool = false
}
```

To break this down, the indicator of change is simply the `shouldChange` boolean, and the set of shows is the `shows: Set<Show>` variable. This is initially set to include all shows, but the user's stored preferences override this on launch. However, the interesting part of this code is the `willSet` property observer on the `shows` variable. This block means: "run this whenever `shows` is about to change". It has an implicit parameter called `newValue` which contains the value that `shows` will be set to once the block returns. In the `willSet` block, the `shouldChange` boolean is set to false (just in case some other code elsewhere in the app forgot to reset it), then the current and new values of `shows` are compared. If there is a difference, the new set is mapped to an array of strings before being saved to `UserDefaults`, and `shouldChange` is set to true. The mapping to array of strings is done because `UserDefaults` (being designed in the Objective-C era) is not capable of storing sets or enums.

In the view controller for the show selection screen, a local copy of shows is stored, reflecting the shows being tracked before any changes are made. Any changes made on this screen are only recorded in the context of this controller, and are then pushed to `State` when the view is dismissed, using:

```swift
override func viewDidDisappear(_ animated: Bool) {
    super.viewDidDisappear(animated)
    State.shows = shows
}
```

This way, if the user opens the selection screen, but then closes it without making changes, there is no need to reload the list of episodes currently being presented. Setting which shows are and aren't in the set is as simple as checking membership in the set when the appropriate button is pressed using the optional `didSelectRowAt` table view data source function.

In the episode list view, to check if the listings should change when the selection screen has been dismissed, I used the `presentationControllerDidDismiss` function to check the state of the `State.shouldChange` boolean. If it is true, the view controller performs the filtering operation and reloads the table data, before finally setting `State.shouldChange` to `false`. At first, however, the `presentationControllerDidDismiss` function didn't work, but  I fixed this by adding conformance to the `UIPopoverPresentationControllerDelegate` protocol, and setting the appropriate popover delegate just before the segue to the selection view controller occurs, using:

```swift
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) {
    if segue.identifier == "ToSelect"  || segue.identifier == "ToSummary" {
      	segue.destination.popoverPresentationController?.delegate = self
    }
}
```

Lastly, to restore the user's preferences when the app launches (so only their tracked shows are displayed), the list of shows stored in `UserDefaults` is retrieved using optional binding (since the user may be opening the app for the first time) and used to populate the `State.shows` set.

```swift
if let str = UserDefaults.standard.object(forKey: "shows") as? [String] {
    var shows = Set<Show>()
    for show in str {
      	shows.insert(Show(rawValue: show)!)
    }
    State.shows = shows
}
```

The filter and sorting for the episodes list is then as simple as:

```swift
episodes.filter({ State.shows.contains($0.show) }).sort(by: { ($0.aired) < ($1.aired) })
```

## Day Two: Advanced Upgrades

To quickly recap, after one day, the app was now as functional as the original project, complete with episode listing and series filtering. The app looked decent, stored the user's tracked shows, could remember preferences using the `UserDefaults` storage. Now it was time to implemented the killer features I had been envisioning from the start: the checklist and up-next list.

Since it was easily the most daunting part of the project, I decided to start with the checklist, as this would involve the most work and research. While `UserDefaults` worked well for storing a small list of strings, I've been told it's not the best for storing large numbers of complex entities like the `Episode` struct. This looked like a task better suited to iOS's bigger data storage solution: Core Data. Core Data is essentially a wrapper around a database of some kind that is used to integrate database functionality in Swift or Objective-C without reinventing the wheel or writing lots of clunky queries as strings. As a side note: I've never really used Core Data in a project before, so this seemed like the prefect time to learn!

As I had already initialised the project with support for Core Data, I (thankfully) got to skip all the setup needed to add Core Data to an existing project. There was also, handily, a blank `.xcdatamodeld` file ready for me to create an entity representing an episode. Because I had already used "Episode" as the name of a struct, Xcode complained when I named my entity "Episode" too, so I took the easy solution and called it "CDEpisode". I added attributes for the show, title, and identifier as strings, an air date as a `Date`, as well as a `watched` attribute as a Boolean for marking an episode as watched or not.

With the entity set up, I created some global functions for common operations the app would use (with the help of some StackOverflow posts), such as `fetchAllEpisodes()`, `fetchEpisode(with identifier:)`, `episodeExists(with identifier:)`, `updateEpisode(with identifier: as watched:)`, and a debugging function `deleteAll()` to clear the database during testing. There was also a  `saveEpisode(with identifier: as watched:)` function, but I ended up making this a method in the `Episode` struct. I won't dive into implementation details too much since most of the methods are similar, and the code isn't very interesting either. However, I would like to show the `fetchAllEpisodes()` function in particular:

```swift
func fetchAllEpisodes() -> [(Episode, Bool)] {
    guard let appDelegate = UIApplication.shared.delegate as? AppDelegate else { return [] }
    let managedContext = appDelegate.persistentContainer.viewContext
    let fetchRequest = NSFetchRequest<NSManagedObject>(entityName: "CDEpisode")
    
    let results: [NSManagedObject]

    do {
        results = try managedContext.fetch(fetchRequest)
    } catch let error as NSError {
        results = []
        print("Could not fetch. \(error)")
    }
    
    return results.map {
        let episode = Episode(
            $0.value(forKey: "show") as! String,
            $0.value(forKey: "identifier") as! String,
            $0.value(forKey: "title") as! String,
            $0.value(forKey: "aired") as! Date
        )
        let watched = $0.value(forKey: "watched") as! Bool
        return (episode, watched)
    }
}
```

This might look like a huge blob of code, but there are a few things which are noteworthy. First, notice the return type is a list of pairs of `Episode` and Boolean. This means the function returns a list of each episode that has been stored in the original `Episode` type I defined instead of the Core Data version. The next few lines until the `return` statement are just a glorified database query, which I'll skip over. The most interesting part of the code is the `return` statement which returns the results from the query, but maps each result in the list to the pair mentioned above. This is done by creating a new `Episode` using the attributes stored in the result which are referred to by the name specified in the `.xcdatamodeld` file. Notice also the explicit casting used since the result type is an `NSManagedObject` (I've sometimes heard this called a "shapeshifter" type due to it being completely determined at runtime). In the same way, the `watched` attribute is also retrieved so the app can know how to present each episode.

Back in the episode listing view controller, I removed the code disabling interaction with the table cells, and updated the `cellForRowAt` to set the cell background colour based on the episode's watched state. I also added the `didSelectRowAt` function to implement marking an episode as watched or unwatched using the Core Data functions listed above . The `didSelectRowAt` final implementation looked like this:

```swift
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) {
    tableView.deselectRow(at: indexPath, animated: true)
    let episode = episodes[indexPath.row]
    if let local = fetchEpisode(withID: episode.identifier) {
        updateEpisode(withID: episode.identifier, as: !local.1)
        let cell = tableView.cellForRow(at: indexPath) as! ListViewCell
        cell.layer.backgroundColor = !local.1 ? UIColor.lightGray.cgColor : episode.show.color
    }
}
```

Regarding the fetching and saving of episodes, I wanted to ensure the app loaded quickly by retrieving data from local storage first, then checking online for anything new. I also had to protect against duplicating entries in the database when downloading data, so I used the Core Data functions above to check if an episode exists in storage before attempting to add it. For the latter, I added a call to the `episodeExists(with identifier:)` function as part of the episode download task, but this caught the attention of the Main Thread Checker tool. The Main Thread Checker is a tool invoked by the debugger to catch uses of specific classes and variables outside of the main thread which can lead to inconsistent or incorrect states, or - in extreme cases - app crashes. To deal with this, I encased the call in a `DispatchQueue.main` block to keep all the Core Data functions on the main thread. I don't know if this is the best way to handle it, but it seems to work. I also included a check for reloading the list of episodes if a new episode has been added to storage:

```swift
var shouldUpdateList = false
for episode in library.flatMap({ $0.value }) {
    DispatchQueue.main.sync {
        if !episodeExists(with: episode.identifier) {
            episode.save(as: false)
            shouldUpdateList = true
        }
    }
}
if shouldUpdateList {
    DispatchQueue.main.async {
        self.episodes = fetchAllEpisodes()
          .map({ $0.0 })
          .filter({ State.shows.contains($0.show) })
          .sorted(by: { ($0.aired) < ($1.aired) })
        self.listView.reloadData()
    }
}
```

After a few tests and bug-fixes, the checklist was just about finished! The final task left was the "up next" feature.

## Coming up...

With the main app mostly done, I reasoned the best place for the "up next" summary would be on a new page, similar to the popover used for the show filtering screen. To that end, I decided to take the same approach and wire up a button in the navigation bar to a new view controller using a popover segue. The new view controller was similar to the filtering one, complete with a table view and a translucent blur background. I almost ended up reusing the same table cell, but I opted to make a new one which was similar. The new table cell had the same cell padding as the show selection view one, but was thinner and had two labels, like the one used for the episode listing.

To populate the list of episodes, the controller queried the `State.shows` set to filter out all the episodes from shows that are not being tracked by the user, since there is no need to show them. From the remaining shows, only the unwatched episodes are kept, and those are sorted by air date, and the first episode - if it exists - is selected as the episode to be watched next. With at most one episode for each tracked show, the episodes are again sorted by air date, and the list is presented to the user in the table. The code used to get the list of "up next" episodes is:

```swift
shows = State.shows
latest = []
let episodes = fetchAllEpisodes()
for show in shows {
    if let (episode, _) = episodes
      .filter({ $0.0.show == show })
      .filter({ !$0.1 })
      .sorted(by: { $0.0.aired < $1.0.aired })
      .first {
        latest.append(episode)
    }
}
latest.sort(by: { $0.aired < $1.aired })
```

To top everything off, I added a `didSelectRowAt` function to the table view so the user can mark an episode as watched from the "up next" summary without having to scroll through the entire list of episodes. When the episode is selected, its `watched` status is updated in the database, and the list of next episodes is immediately updated. By setting `State.shouldChange` to `true`, the main list of episodes is also updated when the user returns from the summary page. This process is shown here:

```swift
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) {
    tableView.deselectRow(at: indexPath, animated: true)
    let episode = latest[indexPath.row]
    updateEpisode(withID: episode.identifier, as: true)
    getLatestEpisodes()
    tableView.reloadData()
    State.shouldChange = true
}
```

## Wrap Up

So, after a solid two days of work, my app is pretty much ready! As a minimum viable product, I would say it is quite solid. There are no major bugs, it performs all the functions laid out at the start of the project, and has already proved handy for my continued Arrowverse enjoyment. There are, however, a couple of issues. First, although I fixed the strange table view rendering bug early on, a smaller version of the bug has reappeared since updating the view to check local data before performing network requests. On launching the app now, everything looks pretty much ok, but for some weird reason, the episode air dates don't render on the immediately visible cells. They appear after being scrolled away, but I can't figure out how to fix this, or why only the air date is affected and not any of the other attributes. Also, as mentioned in the challenge brief, I haven't dealt at all with the manual correction of episode listings. As far as I'm concerned, that's a version 1.0.1 bug-fix, not a version 1.0.0 feature.

Overall, I'm really pleased with this little utility, and I'm also happy that I could build the whole thing in just two days. It was a fun exercise to keep my skills sharp, and to test myself under time constraints. I hope to do another challenge soon; if you have any ideas, please let me know in a comment, or by sending me an [email](mailto:danielmarriner@anachronistic-tech.co.uk). In the meantime, the source for this project can be found on my [GitHub](https://github.com/AnachronisticTech/Arrowverse-Watchlist-iOS); any feedback would be appreciated.