---
date: 30/09/2018
summary: Moving into a new place can be stressful under even the best conditions, but when you're moving in a week before the start of a new academic year into a house several thousand kilometres away from home with people you've never cohabited with before, it's remarkable that anything can go according to plan rather than immediately going sideways...
type: blog
---

# Thoughts and Hot Chocolate – Moving In

While this isn't my first time living away from home in another country, it is my first time living in a house with others. The three of us in the house (all studying computer science) seem to get on well together and there haven't been any mess-ups or disasters thus far. On this front, I'm looking forward to a great deal of fun with these guys swapping jokes and computer puns.

I've just about made it through the first week intact, with most of the major jobs complete. Shopping, I think, is always a bit of a pain: you compile an extensive list of things you need, then after the shop is done you get home and realise you missed a few items, necessitating another trip to the supermarket. Our local shops are well within walking distance, but you'd rather not have forgotten anything in the first place.

The biggest difficulty I faced was unpacking. Since I arrived from overseas, most of my belongings had been boxed up at the end of last year and sent to storage. The company delivered everything on Tuesday, and even though the boxes weren't that many, it took until Friday lunchtime to get my room tidy and organised. What is worse, since I'll be dealing with this same issue at the end of this year, I have to store all the boxes in my room too to pack everything back up again. Fun, not to mention a tad cramped.

Despite these, I'm quite surprised nothing big went wrong. The boxes arrived on time, the shopping has all been done, bills are paid; I'm ready to hit the ground running come Monday morning!