---
date: 22/10/2018
summary: Over the course of a weekend, I watched as a friend of mine built a wonderfully creative way to document and commemorate our growing friendship.
type: blog
---

# What have others been developing this week? – Warwick GameJam

The Warwick University Game Development Society, or Gamedev affectionately, recently held their first 48-hour GameJam event of the year. This recurring weekend-long event is an opportunity for enthusiast and veteran game developers alike to sequester themselves away and focus on a single project; typically revolving around a theme announced at the start of the Jam. While people are free to do what they like, the theme is meant to inspire games to follow a common element. There's nothing formal like judging or prizes, but there is a showcase in the days after, so it's desirable for most projects to share something, even if it's only tangential. This Jam's theme was "colours". If you think that sounds a little vague, that's just about how most people felt for the first of the 48 hours... After a short time, however, ideas started flowing and people set to work designing and implementing their thoughts. I designed a small iOS sprite-based game about a stick figure woman with grey hair that changes colour when she runs through coloured puddles.

While I'd like to write about my short game and how I went about building it, I'll likely save the post for when (and if) it's completed. Instead, I want to focus on a board game developed by a good friend of mine. Conceived of in the final five hours of the Jam, his game revolved around moving pieces from the start to the end of the board (a la most other board games) but included a card-based mechanic that would influence how the game progressed. Most people will likely say this isn't a unique, innovative mechanic (and they're right), but what was quite entertaining was the fact that every card in the deck was somehow inspired by a story in our one-year-old friendship. That's right, each of the seventy-something hand-crafted cards is in some way the punchline or highlight of something that has happened or been said since the day we first met, just about a year ago. I don't know what to make of the fact that the deck is still being populated...

People who know me or who read my blog know I love telling and listening to stories. This board/card game made by my friend, therefore, is almost like a diary of our friendship, complete with our own memes, quotations, and backstory, meaning that if anybody wanted to simulate what it would be like to be friends with us without actually having to bother with the hassle of being friends with us, this is the game to play. Aside from the wacky nature of the cards, the game also plays well mechanically; each player takes a turn in sequence where the pawn (a carefully crafted origami crow) is moved toward the end through a die roll, and a card is played. The effects of the card range from moving the player (or other players) forwards or backwards, causing turns to be missed, swapping pawn positions, or redistributing the players' cards. In addition, each player starts the game with a "world class item", a special card with more extreme effects but can be used only once per game. These cards are immune to other effects like card redistribution, but can be played at any time regardless of whose turn it is.

Overall, this unique board game is a fun, comical, and eerily accurate representation of an unexpected friendship that I never would have expected to be documented in such a creative manner. All I can hope is that as the friendship continues and more stories are told the deck will continue to grow.