---
date: 13/12/2018
summary: Inspiration is a funny thing. When I developed a simple tile-based single-player board game, I thought I’d happened upon a neat little puzzle. When I showed it to my house-mates and other friends, I realised I’d found something special.
type: project
tags: psakse;swift;programming
---

# What have I been developing this term? – “Psakse” (Board and iOS)

I’m sure everyone will agree on what is the most important and significant aspect of going to university: the societies. Ok, the education is good too. At the start of the year I joined the Warwick Game Design Society as I did last year. GameDev (as it is affectionately known) is home to a lot of talented, creative, and fun people, and since I had such a good time with them last year, signing up this year was a no-brainer. However, I felt a little bad that – having been a member for about a year – I had not produced a single game. I resolved to change this and began to wrack my brain for some ideas. Unfortunately, inspiration can be a pain in the backside sometimes; nothing was particularly forthcoming, so I kept the thought as a side process for a couple of weeks.

Around the same time, my mum came to visit me for a long weekend at the nearby Star Trek convention in Birmingham. I happened to mention to her this goal to create a game when we were out one night, and casually asked what she enjoys about games she plays. Words that stood out were “puzzle", “letters", “colours", “grids", etc. She is quite partial to matching games, word games, number puzzles, so the concepts she referred to were not that surprising. What occurred to me, though, was that we could cobble together a game by combining those ideas. We spent an hour talking about how a potential game might play, and on the way home I stopped to buy the essentials for any game creation endeavour: post-it notes, pens, and lots of biscuits.

The next day I began putting things together. The game would consist of a 5x5 grid upon which the player would place a tile with one of four letters and one of four colours on it. The rules were a tile could only be adjacent to another if it matched in either colour, letter, or both. Matching to a single adjacent tile was trivial, but fitting to the constraints of two, three, or even four tiles could be incredibly difficult so a “wild card" was added that could be placed on the board anywhere without restriction.

The puzzle element was added when three tiles were placed on the board at the start of the game at random positions. These tiles were “fixed", they could not be moved by the player, but the player could move any other tile that they had placed at any point during the game providing the tile was moved to a valid place on the board; that is, where it did not conflict with adjacent tiles. Since the board would fill up rapidly, a second sub-grid was added to the board with four unrestricted spaces for swapping tiles without constraints. The last issue was that with four distinct letters – two of each per colour – four colours, and two wild cards, there were 34 cards in total, while only 25 spaces on the board. At first, it was the case that the player had access to all the tiles, but the game changed such that once the initial three cards had been placed, nine (non-wild) cards would be removed from play, increasing the difficulty level. The puzzle would be declared solved when all cards were placed in the large grid in valid spaces.

Initially, I thought it was a neat little pastime; I hadn’t really considered the potential depth and mathematical implications of this game, and I wouldn’t realise this until I invited my friends over one evening. They seemed a little bored while I was cooking, so during a quick break I showed the game and explained the rules. At first, they implied it was an easy puzzle and it would be solved by the time dinner was ready; about a quarter of an hour. I left them to it and got back to the food. Sure enough, dinner was ready after fifteen minutes, and I returned to my computer-science friends and asked them to clear the table for dinner. “NO!" they exclaimed, for they had not solved the puzzle. What had been a clean table – except for the board game – was now a mess of papers and pens and tiles. In the time I had been gone the pair had tried to reason a way through the puzzle and its mechanics using graphs, diagrams, and half-legible, half-written proofs. Dinner would have to wait…

As more people interacted with the game, more ideas emerged about how to play optimally, whether a given puzzle definitely had a solution, how one might compute a strategy, etc. For the mathematically inclined, there were even suggestions that the puzzle may be in the [NP complexity class](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NP_(complexity)) of problems, and may be represented as a [Satisfiability problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_satisfiability_problem). It felt rewarding that quite a few people had become so interested in a little thrown-together rough prototype of a game I’d come up with. One night when everybody came to the house to crack the secrets of the game, I decided to try my hand at making a digital version for people to play on their devices. I loaded up Xcode and began setting up a project in swift to build an app for iPhone. The first iteration of the app was doomed from the outset; I began by building the grid layout of the game in the Interface Builder, but this made the actual programming quite painstaking and tedious since I would have to refer to each button on the grid by a manually assigned ID, or tag. This would not do.

I decided to bin the whole thing and start again, this time by focusing on converting the main aspects of the game into an object-oriented form that could be represented in classes and data structures. I drew up a quick sketch on paper identifying fundamental components of the game and started drafting the classes. Now with each part of the game accessible programmatically, I was not limited to the Interface Builder to plan things. Since the grid was represented by a ‘Grid’ object, I added a method that created an array of buttons for each position, assigned a unique tag to each, allocated physical dimensions and locations based on the device dimensions, and rendered everything to the display automatically.

The cards were simple to represent, too, with obvious attributes like ‘colour’ and ‘letter’, as well as whether the card was wild or not. A card object could be placed into positions on the grid by pressing the appropriate button, and the attributes of the button determining colour and icon would be updated accordingly. The ‘Deck’ object was a list of all possible cards generated at runtime with methods to remove a card when assigned to the grid, shuffle the deck, add wildcards, and remove cards at the beginning on the game based on the size of the grid. This last point was significant since – as the grid was now an object initialised at runtime – the grid size could be configured to be 6x6 or 4x4. This meant that the deck would remove the appropriate number of cards, and the drawing of the grid on the screen would adapt to represent the new size. Suddenly, the app which started as manually created grid on a screen with hardcoded dimensions was now quite extensible and adaptive.

The hardest aspect of the app to develop was the logic of placing tiles. When I created the ‘grid’ object at the start, I thought it seemed intuitive to store tiles as a 2-dimensional array, like coordinates, but this came back to haunt me when I wrote a function to assign the three fixed starting tiles. Since it is quite possible (dare I say likely) that two or all three of the starting tiles don’t share common properties, assigning them to the grid naively could mean a given puzzle is unsolvable. Consider, a yellow ‘A’ and a green ‘B’ placed next to each other would be against the rules, but the player can’t correct this, so the game is over before it starts. As a result, I had to ensure that tiles would not be placed horizontally or vertically adjacent to each other. However, it was only when I came to test the app with a friend that I realised I hadn’t implemented this for vertical tiles since I had forgotten tiles were stored in a 2D array.

This complication meant I had to be extra careful when adding functions to check the validity of a move the player made. I listed out all the potential types of places a tile could be placed – an edge, a corner, or a centre space – and determined a generic way of identifying which tiles would have to be checked in terms of coordinates of the move in the 2D array. I ended up with an entire page of handwritten if-else statements representing the check for a given move in terms of that move’s coordinates on the grid that I could build a function around. All that was left was to call the function while a move was being made and confirm the move if the function returned ‘valid’ or block the move otherwise.

In its finished state, the app behaves almost identically to the board game, with the convenience that it checks valid moves for you rather than having to do that yourself. The name “Psakse" was picked based on the four Greek letters used in the game, ‘psi’, ‘alpha’, ‘xi’, and ‘epsilon’, which spell out the Greek word for “Seek". The process of developing as a board game first, I have to say, worked perfectly for my style of problem-solving: if I can see what it will probably look like at the end, I can build it. Creating a board game without all the code and technical overhead meant I could rapidly prototype and refine my game while sharing it with others and responding to feedback. Once I was happy with the gameplay, building the app itself was quite a natural process, and I knew exactly what the finished product was supposed to look like, so I could simply fill in the gaps.

Despite how pleased I am that I could build and implement a game like this from start to end, I’m not ready to release it into the wild just yet. Forgetting – for the moment – that Apple’s Developer Programme costs $99 per year to submit to their App Store, the app itself is still very plain and functional. There are no frills and fancy features, no interesting user interface or settings menu. I could implement them, particularly a settings screen for changing grid size, adding a timer component, etc., but the core of the game is there, and I’m happy with it remaining on the simplistic side for the time being. Also, the code is quite horrific since this was my first major Swift project, so I’ll likely take time over the Christmas holidays to tidy up, if not to rewrite the whole thing now that I know what to do and what to avoid.  In the meantime, I now have a puzzle app of my own making that I can showcase to the fine people at GameDev, as well as play whenever I have fifteen minutes to myself and am looking for a challenge.