---
date: 24/12/2018
summary: Some games age well and others don’t. Civilization V is almost ten years old and yet it holds up incredibly well in terms of mechanics and in-game graphics. It has as much replay value as ever, and since it’s no longer the latest game in the series, the price is right if you want to introduce it to new players, like I did one weekend and stayed up until 5AM…
type: blog
tags: gaming
---

# What have I been playing this term? – Sid Meier’s Civilization V (PC)

On the way home from campus one evening, one of my friends mentioned playing Civilization V once. Now there was a game I hadn’t thought about in a while, but it occurred to me that my circle of friends at university would probably be quite enamoured with it. We are always looking for games to play together, and this seemed like the perfect option, except two of the four had never played, and the other had only completed one match in its entirety. I suggested to the group that we give it a go, especially since the Black Friday sale was on and the complete game with all its expansions could be had for around eight pounds (a steal, if you ask me).

Two of the friends went home, but one of the two who hadn’t ever played is currently my house-mate, so I asked him if he’d like to see what the game was all about. We started around half-ten in the evening with a “quick" single-player versus AI match beginning in the Ancient Era with little in the way of technology and resources. Quick is in quotes because we just about got up to the Renaissance Era when we decided to call it quits at 3:30AM. Yep, it’s a long game, but house-mate was enthused, so he bought it and we set a date for that Friday for all to come over and we’d play together.

Come Friday, the session started around 7:30 in the evening after everyone had gone home to eat then regrouped at our house. The normally unused dining room table was now littered with laptops and cables, drinks and snacks; everything needed for a LAN party. Since I was quite experienced in the game from before, we divided into teams of each AI player on their own, me on my own, and the other human players grouped together. I didn’t mind, but it did mean nobody wanted to trade with me very often…

It turns out I dodged quite the bullet as – even though one player had never played before and his teammate was supposed to be teaching him the game as we went – through some series of incredibly unfortunate happenings, both players ended up in so much economic debt that they quickly fell behind in terms of research and military. I tried to offer help, but the rivalry meant they were a little proud to be pulled up by an enemy, and their debt was far beyond my earnings in any case. One of the two managed to stabilise eventually, but the other was a bit of a lost cause. None of that stopped us from playing until 5AM; thank goodness it was now Saturday, and we didn’t have lectures or seminars in the morning.

By Monday I had mostly recovered, but I should note that Mondays this term were my busiest day. Two hour-long labs, four hour-long lectures. I was feeling a little tired, but not too bad considering I had another match with house-mate on Saturday which lasted until 1AM. Since my friends and I all finished at the same time, house-mate asked if any of the other two friends wanted to come over for dinner. One declined and went home, but the other – Mr. Greek-levels-of-debt-last-game – opted to come over. Because I hadn’t learned my lesson from the last two games, I asked the friend if he was interested in playing or watching a proper game of Civilization where the mechanics and concepts were actually explained. He and house-mate instantly jumped at the idea, so we fired up our laptops and started a game anew around half-seven after dinner.

House-mate mentioned he had a 10AM seminar the next day, so we played until around midnight. I asked the pair what they wanted to do: “I can still make it if we play until one in the morning!" “Alright", I thought, “I’ll keep an eye on the clock." At 1AM I repeated the question. “Play until two!" was house-mate’s answer. Once more, I asked at two: “It’s fine if I miss the 10AM; it’s only a databases lab anyway!" “It’s your lab", I thought, “my day doesn’t start until 2PM". At four in the morning I asked if it was time to save and quit. “NO!" the pair responded, “Don’t be ridiculous!" I threw in the towel at 4:30 since I was exhausted. On the plus side, we’d found a game everyone liked! The downside was we had found a game everyone could spend hours on without realising…

Now, I know our late-night gaming sessions aren’t the most responsible use of our time, but one thing that struck me about the entire thing was how interested in the mechanics of the game house-mate became. While the play-sessions were great fun, what I found equally fun were the questions house-mate would ask relating to strategy, goals, and the advantages and disadvantages of different styles of play. Having put a few hundred hours into the game over the years, I could answer a lot of the questions, but only in an intuitive way. Civilization is built on a system of resource yields such as food, production, science, etc. The success or failure of one’s empire depends on managing those yields using cities and workers. I know there are some complex calculations deep in the game that determine how everything fits together, but due to the scale of the game – number of cities, units, tiles – it becomes impractical to calculate everything to minmax the game. Because of all the variables and the sheer scope, I found it was easier to remember vaguely how mechanics fit together and can be leveraged into a strategy rather than optimising the fun out of the game by taking account of every little detail. As a result, I can tell you a lot about how X unit is used, or how Y mechanic works, or why you might be interested in the effects of Z since I know what the pieces of the puzzle are, not because I’ve got everything calculated and memorised.

What is more, house-mate’s questions made me think about certain game mechanics in a different way to how I had used them in the past. For example, by chance, house-mate was given a free “Gatling gun" unit in one of our sessions. In the past I always saw the Gatling gun as a bit of a useless unit to have since it was technically a ranged unit (that is, it could attack targets at a distance), however it only had a range of one, meaning it could only attack enemies in adjacent tiles. Other ranged units have a range of two or three, usually, meaning they can attack enemies two or three tiles away respectively, so the Gatling gun seemed a bit pointless. However, when house-mate asked me what the use of the unit was, I considered it in another way: melee units (the compliment to ranged) can only attack adjacent enemies, but if they eliminate the enemy they move to occupy that tile. The Gatling gun, hence, behaved as a melee unit that could only attack adjacent enemies, but since it dealt ranged damage, it wouldn’t move to occupy a tile if it killed the enemy. This could be useful in defending cities under siege where you wouldn’t want your army to abandon the city on killing an enemy and leaving the city defenceless.

To give some context, my house-mate is smart. Very smart. We’re both studying computer science in the same year, but he is a far better programmer than I. He has a strong sense for optimising things and making whatever he works on run more efficiently, so it didn’t surprise me that he would ask these types of questions. By contrast, I tend to focus more on how something might work, then work through the details as they come and iron out issues at the end. What I found with Civilization and these discussions we had was that we could talk about a situation and approach it from both our views. We could look at why certain moves were better or worse than others both in terms of mathematical detail and optimisation, and also from a more abstract, intuitive viewpoint based on past experience. I think anyone who has ever taken a literature class will probably understand the kind of discussion I’m referring to; it was very much like two people talking about the same chapter in a book and reading into it entirely differently, but with a game.

Except for the past week, it has been over a year or two since I played a full game of Civilization, much less since I had to think about complex gameplay concepts and the mechanisms through which a player progressed and advanced through the course of a match. I’ll admit I’m no star player or expert, but I’m pleased I could pick up the game relatively easily after such a break and even teach others to play relatively well. I’m also glad to have found a game I can enjoy with my friends as well as have an intellectual discussion about, even if it mans staying up well into the small hours on a school night!